---
title: "M. Cherif Bassiouni"
last_title: "Bassiouni"
position: "Professor Emeritus, DePaul University College of Law; Co-founder, International Institute of Higher Studies in Criminal Sciences"
image: "image-12.png"
bio: 
- " - Nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize for various roles played in the establishment of the International Criminal Court (1998)<br />"
- "- Held numerous UN positions integral in the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the Convention on the Prevention and Suppression of Torture<br />" 
- "- Most recently, he chaired the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry and the UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry for Libya<br />"
---
Professor Bassiouni is Emeritus Professor of Law at DePaul University where he taught from 1964 to 2012. In 1990, he helped establish the International Human Rights Law Institute at DePaul University, serving as its President from 1990 to 1997, and now as President Emeritus. In 1972, he also helped found the International Institute of Higher Studies in Criminal Sciences in Siracusa, Italy, currently serving as its President. He also held positions as Secretary General, President, and now Honorary President of the International Association of Penal Law. Prof. Bassiouni was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1999 for his role in the establishment of the ICC. Specifically, he was the Chairman, Drafting Committee, UN Diplomatic Conference on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court in 1998; Vice-Chairman, General Assembly's Prepatory Committee on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court from 1996 to 1998; Vice-Chairman, General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee on the Establishment of an International Criminal Court in 1995. Furthermore, he has held numerous UN positions integral in the establishment of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Convention on the Prevention and Suppression of Torture. Most recently, he was on Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry and the UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry for Libya. To date, Professor Bassiouni has authored 27 books, edited 46 books, and authored 265 articles on international criminal law, comparative criminal law, human rights, and U.S. criminal law. Prof. Bassiouni received his LL.B at the University of Cairo, J.D. at Indiana University, LL.M. at John Marshall Law School, and S.J.D. from George Washington University.