---
title: Georgia
country: georgia
published: true
date: 2015-02-23T19:09:00.000Z
phase: 'Situations & Cases'
link_to_more_information: 'http://www.icc-cpi.int/en_menus/icc/structure%20of%20the%20court/office%20of%20the%20prosecutor/comm%20and%20ref/pe-ongoing/georgia/Pages/georgia.aspx'
description: 'This investigation concerns allegations of pillaging and damage to civilian property resulting from the armed conflict between South Ossetian forces backed by Russia and the Georgian Army. The ICC has a formal investigation opened in Georgia. '
slug: georgia
---


The Situation in Georgia focuses on alleged atrocity crimes (crimes against humanity, war crimes) committed during an international armed conflict which involved Georgian government forces, South Ossetian separatist forces, and Russian interventionist forces and which occurred in and around South Ossetia between July 1 and October 10, 2008.&nbsp;

Under the Soviet Union, Ossetia was divided into North Ossetia, a region in Russia, and South Ossetia, a region in Georgia. With Soviet support, South Ossetia became an autonomous region within Georgia. However, tensions grew between Georgia, which wanted to reinforce its control over South Ossetia, and South Ossetia, which chafed under Georgia’s increasingly repressive rule. With South Ossetia’s declaration of sovereignty as a republic within the Soviet Union and election of a national government, Georgian government forces invaded South Ossetia. From 1991 to 1992, Georgian government forces and South Ossetian separatist forces fought over control of South Ossetia, killing and forcing thousands to flee the violence. Under the 1992 Sochi peace agreement, all parties agreed to a ceasefire, the establishment of the Joint Commission and the Joint Peacekeeping Forces, and monitoring of the agreement by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). However, with the core issue still unresolved, South Ossetia remained a *de facto* autonomous region of Georgia and fighting would recur in 2004, 2006, and 2007. Provocatively, Russia granted citizenship and visa-free travel to South Ossetians, and there were rumors that South Ossetia would secede from Georgia and unify with North Ossetia as a region of Russia. In March 2008, South Ossetia announced its independence. In April 2008, Russia authorized official relations with South Ossetia and Abkhazia.&nbsp;

By August 2008, long-simmering tensions between Georgia and Russia over Russia’s support of separatist regions South Ossetia and Abkhazia boiled over when South Ossetian separatist forces attacked Georgians. On August 7, Georgia launched a military campaign to assert control over South Ossetia, and South Ossetian separatist forces began killing hundreds of ethnic Georgians or violently forcing thousands of ethnic Georgians to flee from South Ossetia.&nbsp; The Joint Peacekeeping Forces which were composed of Russians, South Ossetians, and Georgians were also attacked by the parties. On August 8, using the pretext of stopping violence against Russians and aggression against South Ossetia, Russia invaded Georgia. On August 10, despite Georgia’s declaration of a ceasefire and withdrawal of its forces from South Ossetia, Russian forces pursued Georgian forces into Georgian territory. After the negotiation of a ceasefire agreement on August 12, Russian forces withdrew back to South Ossetia but created a 20 km wide “buffer zone” of Georgian territory around South Ossetia in which Georgian forces were blocked from entering South Ossetia and, again, South Ossetian separatist forces began killing hundreds of ethnic Georgian civilians or violently forcing thousands of ethnic Georgians to flee from South Ossetia and the buffer zone. On August 26, to Georgia’s consternation and outrage, Russia recognized South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states. On October 10, 2008, after months of continued hostilities and a second ceasefire agreement negotiated on September 8, Russian forces finally withdrew out of the buffer zone back into South Ossetia.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;

Georgia ratified the Rome statute on September 5, 2003. On August 14, 2008, the ICC Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) [publicly announced](https://www.icc-cpi.int/iccdocs/otp/OTP-PE-rep-2015-Eng.pdf) that it was conducting a preliminary examination and was monitoring national proceedings to investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes committed in and around South Ossetia. On March 17, 2015, the government of Georgia informed the OTP that Georgia had indefinitely suspended national proceedings. On October 8, 2015, the ICC Presidency [assigned the Situation in Georgia](https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=pr1158) to Pre-Trial Chamber I. On October 13, 2015, the OTP [requested authorization](https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=pr1159) to conduct a formal investigation. On January 27, 2016, Pre-Trial Chamber I [granted authorization](https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=pr1183) to the OTP to conduct a formal investigation into the Situation of Georgia. There are currently no cases within this Situation.

For more information on the Situation in Georgia, please visit the [ICC page](https://www.icc-cpi.int/en_menus/icc/situations%20and%20cases/situations/ICC-01_15/Pages/default.aspx).