---
title: "Republic of Côte d'Ivoire"
layout: icc-cases
category:
---
The situation in the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire involves violence resulting from contested presidential elections in 2010, as well as a decade of tension over the leadership of Côte d'Ivoire. After former President Laurent Gbagbo was elected in 2000, Côte d'Ivoire endured a revolt in 2002 and a stagnated revolution thereafter. Control of the country was divided. The government held the mostly Christian south, and rebels controlled the mostly Muslim north. After Gbagbo refused to hold elections in 2004, the state allegedly ordered airstrikes against different rebel groups. Nine French soldiers were killed during the airstrikes.  In subsequent days, France destroyed Ivorian military aircraft and pro-government supporters attacked French Ivorians and French nationals.

The government refused to hold elections until 2010. In November 2010, former Prime Minister and Rally of the Republicans candidate Alessane Ouattara was elected President, but former President Gbabgo disputed the election results and refused to cede power. In November 2010, allegedly pro-Gbagbo forces attacked civilians in Abidjan and western Côte d'Ivoire perceived to be associated with the opposition, pursuant to an alleged state policy to target political opponents of Gbagbo and to retain political control of Côte d'Ivoire by any means necessary. The attacks allegedly targeted civilians often on the bases of suspected ethnic, religious, national or political affiliations. The attacking forces included defense and security forces, police, and militias (including youth groups) and armed mercenaries, some of which were allegedly recruited, armed, and given orders by governmental forces of Côte d'Ivoire. The situation escalated to an armed conflict between pro-Gbagbo forces and pro-Ouattara forces until April 2011, with forces from both sides allegedly committing murder, rape, other attacks against civilians and attacking cultural religious institutions.

The Republic of Côte d'Ivoire accepted ICC jurisdiction in April 2003 and again on 14 December 2010. The Office of the Prosecutor initiated a proprio motu investigation on 23 June 2011, which was later authorized by the Pre-Trial Chamber III on 3 October 2011. The Office of the Prosecutor initially requested authorization to investigate crimes since 28 November 2010, but the investigation was later expanded to cover evidence of crimes since 19 September 2002. Within the Côte d'Ivoire situation, there are three ongoing cases.