---
title: Libya
country_code: LY
layout: icc-cases
slug: libya
excerpt: "EXCERPT COPY"
---
The situation in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (Libya) involves mass violence that occurred throughout Libya’s six month popular uprising in 2011. Colonel Muammar Mohammed Abu Minyar Gaddafi had ruled Libya since seizing power in 1969 and instituted a legal and political regime which allowed him to rule with absolute power. After the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions in early 2011, Gaddafi and the Libyan government allegedly began preparing for possible demonstrations in Libya. Initial protests in Libya began on February 15, 2011, when thousands of demonstrators gathered in front of the police headquarters in Benghazi to protest the arrest of two Libyan lawyers and human rights activists. Libyan Security Forces allegedly openly fired into the crowd, killing many civilians. Additional protests followed these initial killings, then calling for Gaddafi’s government to step down. In the following weeks, Libyan Security Forces allegedly carried out a systematic attack against the civilian population, killing, injuring, arresting and disappearing hundreds of civilians perceived as dissidents, including civilians who participated in protests, talked to international media, or citizens of Egypt and Tunisia perceived to be associated with the uprising. The attacks followed the same pattern in multiple locations, but were especially prominent in Benghazi and Misrata. These attacks allegedly followed from a State policy, designed to maintain political power and to restrain demonstrators from protesting by all means, even by the use of lethal force. The Office of the Prosecutor asserts that exact figures are unavailable as a result of measures to cover up casualties, but cites some credible information estimating that 500-700 people were killed in the initial February shootings, and that thousands died over the course of the conflict. The United Nations estimates that approximately 535,000 migrant workers, refugees and asylum seekers and 327,342 Libyans have been displaced. The Security Council referred the situation in Libya to the ICC on February 26, 2011 through unanimous Resolution 1970. Following a preliminary investigation, the Office of the Prosecutor officially opened an investigation on March 3, 2011. Within the Libya situation, there is one ongoing case, with one case terminated after the death of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi.