---
title: Prof. Leila Nadya Sadat
published: true
board_chair: false
last_name: Sadat
image_path: /uploads/sadat-leila-sqr-002.jpg
position: >-
  James Carr Professor of International Criminal Law and Director of the Whitney
  R. Harris World Law Institute, Washington University School of Law; Special
  Adviser on Crimes Against Humanity to the ICC Prosecutor
description: >-
  James Carr Professor of International Criminal Law and Director of the Whitney
  R. Harris World Law Institute, Washington University School of Law; Special
  Adviser on Crimes Against Humanity to the ICC Prosecutor
---

Leila Nadya Sadat is the James Carr Professor of International Criminal Law and Director of the Whitney R. Harris World Law Institute at Washington University School of Law. She has served as Special Adviser on Crimes Against Humanity to the International Criminal Court Prosecutor since 2012.&nbsp; Professor Sadat is an internationally recognized authority and prolific scholar writing in the fields of public international law, international criminal law, human rights and foreign affairs, and has published more than 100 books and articles in leading journals, academic presses, and media outlets throughout the world. She is a co-author of leading textbooks on *International Criminal Law* (with Paust, Bassiouni, et. al., Carolina 2013) and International Law: *Cases and Materials* (with Janis & Noyes, West 2020). Her award-winning scholarship includes&nbsp;*The International Criminal Court and the Transformation of International Law* (Brill 2002), *Forging a Convention for Crimes Against Humanity* (Cambridge 2011) and *Seeking Accountability for the Unlawful Use of Force* (Cambridge 2016)*.* Her articles have appeared in leading law reviews and journals worldwide. Her film, *Never Again: Forging a Convention for Crimes Against Humanity* was accepted in prestigious international film festivals including New Haven, St. Louis and Belfast (Ireland).&nbsp; In Spring 2011 she became the first woman to hold the Alexis de Tocqueville Distinguished Fulbright Chair in Paris, France and recently received an Honorary Doctorate from Northwestern University as well as the Arthur Holly Compton Faculty Achievement Award from Washington University, the highest distinction awarded to any Washington University faculty member excluding the medical school.

Professor Sadat is the Director of the *Crimes Against Humanity Initiative*, a ground-breaking project launched in 2008 to write the world’s first global treaty on crimes against humanity, an effort that bore fruit at the International Law Commission which produced its own draft articles that are now pending before the UN General Assembly’s Sixth Committee. In 1918 she started a *Gun Violence and Human Rights* examining the U.S. gun violence crisis from a human rights perspective. The Harris Institute has been invited to present its findings to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and submitted stakeholder reports to the U.N. Human Rights Committee and Council on the U.S. gun violence crisis. She recently launched a project on COVID-19, international law and global governance. She is the President of the International Law Association (American Branch), a Counsellor of the American Society of International Law, and a member of the U.S. Council on Foreign Relations and the American Law Institute. She has clerked on both U.S. (Fifth Circuit) and French courts (*Cour de Cassation* and *Conseil d’Etat*), and has received law degrees from Columbia University (LLM), Tulane University (JD) and the University of Paris-Sorbonne (DEA).